
See the top level README for information on where to find documentation
for the raspberry pi and the ARM processor inside.  Also find information
on how to load and run these programs.

This example is for the pi3 in aarch32 bit mode, see other directories
for other flavors of raspberry pi.

This is a very simple bootloader.  Instead of the sd dance (see
top level README), this makes life a bit simpler and greatly reduces
physical wear and tear on the sd card socket.  Do the sd card dance one
more time with this kernel.img.  Get some sort of serial solution to
connect a dumb termial program with the ability to download raw/ascii
files.

bootloader01 was .hex based, this one is also .hex based but a
different way to parse it.  bootloader02 through bootloader06
expect binary files, a binary image of the memory starting at
address 0x8000.  I intend to release bootloader08 at the same time
and it will be .bin based but have the go feature.

This bootloader07 parses intel hex formatted files.  Look that up at
wikipedia, it is very simple and historically widely used for bare
metal embedded work.  (S record is another format like intel hex but
of course motorola had to have their own.  Intel hex and Motorola S-
record).  I felt like doing another state machine and honestly had
forgotten I did one before in bootloader01.  This bootloader does
not make any of the others obsolete, it was just a fun exercise.

The thing that annoyed me the most about my bootloader is that
I use minicom and minicom spawns a separate program to do the file
transfers, xmodem, ascii, kermit, etc, and there is a delay and
a loss of data when the spawned program exits and minicom returns.
The solution is that you hit the g key when you want the program
to start so you are basically back in the terminal at that point.

I normally do not deliver binaries.  In this case I have included all
of the build files so that you can at least get started without having
to build the bootloader.  Backup whatever kernel.img file you are using
and replace with the kernel.img file in this repo (on your sd card) to
use this program.

There are a pair of holes on the board labelled RUN.  If you are able
to solder or find other solutions (there are pins that can be pushed
into holes like this), you can put a momentary switch that when closed
will reset the board, and released allow it to boot again.  Then you
can use this bootloader and simply press the button to try another
program.

Wow, forgot that the GPU planted bootstrap turns on the caches.  And
I was seeing the cache coherency problems with doing that.  In theory
I have that fixed, it invalidates I and D and branch prediction
before launching the downloaded code.
